Woodie:         Bassist.
Adam:           Vocals.
Luna:           Saxophone.
Saulo:          Production and guitar.

Peter (Boone):  Production
Jasper:         Front man of JARVIN.

Vagabundos is a band of six people?
Woodie: No 5 now.

Oh, what happened?
Adam: You don't want to know. It's a professional personal slip up.

You've been touring to Brasil, also to England. Right now you're recording a new album.
Luna: Not yet.
Woodie: We're getting ourselves ready for the summer
Adam: Getting our shit together.
Woodie: we recorded the single ages ago and we're going to release it as a new one.

What's your process in creating new music? How do you go from nothing to something?
Woodie: sometimes we jam on stage.
Luna: Sometimes it's random improv
Woodie: When a lick sounds really cool, the drummer picks up on it. We start jamming and making a structure.
Adam: Everybody jumps in on little things and sometimes they jump in and play by themselves while everybody is jamming.
In the process there's a lot of talking. There's a bassline, the drumline, the turn around and the middle eight section that might sound really cool but you might want to add more.
Than you might have Saulo and Adam talking to each other about what they can do to harmonize with each other.
Luna and I will be sitting there and some times it all comes together.
Luna: It gives my space as well to try out arrangements. Sometimes he comes up with a riff for me, sometimes Saulo does.
Woodie: We don't stick to our instruments. We invite each other to try and play something. Last time someone came up with a sick bassline for a dub part and he just pulled the bass out of my hands.
Everyone is equal and together in the process of making music.

And the context of the music? The lyrics?
Luna & Woodie: The lyrics are completely from Adam.
Adam: Yeah, it's me. I like how a lot of bands write their lyrics together. But I do need another singer to write with. It's hard to write with a guitarist or a bassist.
They don't have the same vibe. When a drummer talks to a drummer they know what they're talking about.

We talked about this earlier. How there used to be one microphone in the room when recording...
Woodie: Yeah, there used to be just one microphone in the room and the faders were like the distance from the instrument to the microphone.
So the drum and the amps for the bass go way in the back. Otherwise it's too loud for the mic. And the singer comes real close, saxophone a bit more distant.
It someone needs to be louder you just move them closer to the mic. That's how you fade your music.

You told me how you use different rooms when recording your music...
Woodie: Yeah, we record drums and bass together. The drums are in the room together with the bass.
But the amp of the bass is in another room, which we record. The bassist has the sound in his headphones. That's how the drum and bass can play together while being recorded separately.
Luna: In the meantime I play along just for the completeness of the song. So everyone can play together.

What are the safety measures you take to make sure your sound is recorded well?
Luna: At one moment I was playing my sax while being surrounded by a shield so my mic wouldn't record any other sounds than my own.
Woodie: The amp is one measure. But other bands can do it differently. They can choose to do a live recording. All together in one room.
That way you have a lot of overwriting but it also provides another timbre.
Luna: It also depends on the space itself. We recorded in this studio and also in BOMA studio.
Woodie: Yeah, everyone had a different room there. The singer was looking down on us.
Luna: There was a whole "thing" around the drum kit and a really high ceiling.
Woodie: There were no parallel walls. It was a whole crooked place.

What the difference between live and in recording studio?
Adam: Our guitarist went to school for sound production and recording. He has a very clean way of doing things. He records everything separately.
He then edits everything afterwards and sometimes it's a fucking pain in the ass for him to edit.
While the way Peter (Boone) would do it is he would record everything together.
Luna: He likes the authentic sound. While Saulo is more a person who really likes to edit.
Woodie: Sometimes when there's a bassline and some notes are not exactly on time, he cuts in it and tries to fix it. That way it sounds "good" but also too clean.
That way, when we listen to it, we miss out on something. People know us from playing live. When we release a clean-cut album like that there's just too much difference.
Adam: In my personal opinion: it didn't sound like us. Saulo loves it cause he can hear his work. He can hear everything perfectly, he's very proud it.
But personally I don't want to record like this again.
Luna: We also discussed this for the next album.
Adam: He won't be editing it, basically.
Luna: He wants us to practice better so there doesn't need to be any editing.
Adam: Whilst creating our EP we rehearsed the shit out of it. We played the same song over and over again. If you can record that it sounds perfect.
Of course there's still a human touch to it so it's not going to be "perfect perfect". But it sounded like us.
Adam: It's funny actually because we had our EP release booked before we'd even finish recording... Well, we finished recording the songs, but we hadn't finished editing them.
So the EP release was booked and Saulo was working as fuck. And all of a sudden he said he couldn't finish it.
So we just had to chop everything and be really fast with it and release it like this. That's why it still had a bit of authentic sound.
But he had two years, you know? So I asked him "is it finished yet?" And he's like "No, but we have to rerecord that."
Luna: It kind of milked it out. The album is not something I listen to anymore. But now I feel like we're getting to the point where we have enough material, again.
And at some point, when we have time, I want to do it again but differently and better.
Woodie: Well rehearsed but not to much.
Luna: Yeah, so the band you hear is the same as you hear on stage.
Adam: We had a bit of an issue at one point where the album was recorded but it was still in editing process. And then we were still playing those songs on stage.
Normally you make the album, release the album and tour the album, you know? Well, we did it the other way around. So we ended up touring the album for three years and then it came out.
Luna: That's also how we make music. We make music on stage so by the time we get to finish the song as it is, we've also played it several times, several versions of it.
Woodie: The song also starts breathing when we play it live and realize what was good or bad or when the crowd goes crazy on something, we also change it in the original song.
The song develops.
Adam: And then we play the same songs from the album and they sound different.

Is there a best-practice to recording or live music?
Luna: It really depends on the sound you want. It's very subjective.
Adam: Peter is Peter and he likes another kind of sound so he records it in another kind of way.
On a drum kit there's a really good trick I learned. The microphone faces the skin of the drum. When you put your ear really close to the drum and you just play it whilst moving your ear around,
you hear this *woop* but on some places you hear too much of the *kah*. When you place the mic you want to place it right between the *woop* and the *kah*.
You really hear the tone of the drum as well as the *kah* when you hit the skin. Saulo really likes both of those things but sometimes you might want more of the *woop* or of the *kah*.
Woodie: The placement of the mics is really important with drums.
Adam: Jasper has something special on his amplifier. He marked a little square of where to put the microphone to record that specific sound he wants where it's on the edge of the cone.
Woodie: It's very subjective. If you want to record an old guitar you place your mic differently then when you're recording something else.
Adam: These are small things we do...

[Saulo enters the room.]

Woodie: We're talking about recordings. So it's right up your street.

Welcome, nice to meet you.
We were just talking about the good-practice of recording and how you record songs. I assume there is a good-practice, a "one way to do it perfectly".
Saulo: In terms of recording there is no right formula. I think that each approach you take at recording suits best for a different kind of music or band.
We are a band where our energy manifests itself best when playing live. We are known to have very energetic live performances.
So our first attempt is to reproduce this live energy in recording. But that also requires a lot of infrastructure before that's possible.
For instance: recording everybody live can be tricky because it's a way more complex studio setting in terms of separating the sounds from each other.
It's not as easy as just putting everybody in a room, placing microphones and push "rec".
I think the approach we try to use is to rehearse the main bulk of it live and then we remove a few things or redub a few things that need to be isolated.
We also improvise a lot as well. Most of the solos come out of jamming and improvising.

Are there any personal tricks you use?
Saulo: Well depends. I'm known to be a producer that edits a lot. I like a lot of my sounds to be super clean and distinctive so I can design every single instrument in the mix.
Every single hit, every single tom on the drums needs to sound great. I clean a lot of spillage. But this is not a thumb rule. Depending on the genre you record some spillage can sound good.
So I first clean up, and when it's all cleaned up I start bringing some of the dirt back in. I do this by adding a trash microphone or so and add a bit of ambiance.
And I'm still a believer, especially when recording drums, that when you listen to the drum, as a player or as a listener, you listen to that with two ears.
So when you record a multitrack session, you'd have to place up to 16-20 microphones around the drum kit. Sometimes they mic every single cymbal, metal band can do that sometimes.
They put a lot of microphones around the drum but you don't listen to that with 16 ears. So the microphone that captures the kick drum should only capture the kick drum.

Why would that be useful?
Saulo: Because it's an accurate sound. And the idea to microphone things is in my opinion to translate the sound you would hear with your ears. Not to enhance it or make it any better.
Unless you want something specifically designed for that. But in the case of Vagabundos I try to be accurate to the sound of the drummer. If I hear the drum like that with my ears,
I also want to hear it like that in recording.

How many tracks do you use when recording songs?
Depends, we have recordings with a lot of layers. It can very anywhere between 15 to 40 tracks. It also depends on the producer and recording studio. Sometimes we add harmonies to some of the instruments.
We don't add too much stuff in the studio that would make it sound different from our live performances.

So you don't have that many effects on the tracks then?
Saulo: No, we use the basics. There are various effects but there is a basis. To me the main secret for a good mix all lays in two things: compression and equalization.
If that's well done, you have a good sound to start from. For the rest, the only effects I use are ambients which are reverb, a bit of delay and that's it.
Not everything has that. Normally vocals and saxophone are always going to have some reverb, delay, compression and equalization and that's it.
The guitar is the same. Sometimes, when it's a dirty guitar, you don't have to compress it that much.

So there's not that much effect layering?
Saulo: No. We certainly don't do walls of fucking plugins, or walls of lots of effects, no.

Live there will never be 40 tracks, I guess.
Saulo: No, that's true. Live there would be something between 8 - 10 tracks. With some layering you easily reach something between 16 and 20 tracks.
Luna: Depending on how good you mic the drums, no?
Woodie: In practice it's different. Sometimes we have two or three mics for the drums.
Saulo: It depends on the venue. In small venues your don't have to mic the drums because it's too loud already. But when you go to a festival they sometimes double up on some of the drum's microphones.
Our thumb rule is not to meddle with the live engineer's choice. I don't meddle too much with the live recordings. I only meddle with the engineering when it comes to recording.

Saulo and Woodie, you play guitar and bass. I have seen you use a lot of pedals...
Woodie: Yeah, for me they go straight to the amp. My signal comes from the bass through the pedals to the amp and then out. The pedals only transform the wave i play.

How many effects do you use at one time?
Woodie: At one time max three. That's very rarely. For some weird sounds I mix a lot of effects. Mostly we use one or two.
Saulo: with my guitar I have quite a lot of effects. I'm very rarely going to use two effects simultaneously. I have compression that is constantly on. Mainly so I can et some sustain on the pick-ups of my guitar.
I always set the attack of the compressor very high so the plucking of a string with the plectrum really comes out. We play a lot of funk and that really accompanies the genre and enhances the tone.
I have some distortions. Some that vary from grunch to heavy rock. But I never use them at the same time.

How many parameters can / do you have to control at once in your sound?
Saulo: At once?! Live I control very little. Everything is pre-programmed. The only parameter that I control is on the delays where I have a tap tempo function and the repetitions will go according to the song.
Next to that I don't change them a lot. Only when sound checking.
Woodie: I have one bass micro synth. There are loads of parameters. So when we jam I fiddle with it. But distortion and boost always stay the same depending on the venue.
I always have to check how loud I can go with my booster. After that we don't touch it anymore. Otherwise the sound engineer is going to get pissed of.

Have you ever thought about automation?
Saulo: Yes, I have thought about automating it. There are moments where I use different combinations of effects in the same song. There are some really needy systems that are really old and really complex to set up.
Recently somebody told me about a Voodoo Lab system where you can preset your layers and just press a button to select the next or the previous combination.

Is it digital?
Saulo: I don't know.
Woodie: No it's not. It's fully mechanical. It uses tubes and air compression.
Saulo: I highly recommand you looking at Voodoo Lab. Because sometimes you start with a clean song. Then, halfway through the song you need a distortion with a delay.
Woodie: Yeah, you have to deactivate some sounds and activate some others and then you start tap dancing on your paddle board.
Saulo: I bear those things in mind when I create the arrangement for the songs as well. So when it comes to rehearsals I also rehearse which pedals to push.
Woodie: I always put the pedals I use frequently together close to each other on the board. When I have to activate the them I can press both the buttons with one step.
Saulo: If I count the amount of switches on my board, I have 16. So you really need to think it through. The effects is never the purpose.
There are a lot of guitarists who think that that when get a lot of effects on a big pedal board, they're going to sound great.
But in some of my songs I have my compression running and just put my distortion on and that's it.
Woodie: We're looking for our sound as well. In JARVIN, the other band, there I use my pedal board a lot. But here, with Vagabundos, I don't even bring my pedal board with me.

Could this pedal board ever be replaced with just a tablet?
Saulo: It could. Although I would not like it because most of my pedals are analogue. But I've worked in digital and emulation mode. I don't see problems with it.
Nowadays it's all made "in the box". There are some things for which I never use any digital plugins. But there are occasions where I do use them.
To me they sound good and to me the final product is most important. You do not need to be a purist. Some say there is a clear difference. Is there?!
99.9% of the population cannot hear the difference. I challenge the .1% and I assure you they are bullshitting.

What's your opinion on the digitalisation?
Woodie: For me it's stupid to say but I like the pushing of the pedals. I like the authenticity. With an app that all disappeaars.
Saulo: You can still put it all into an IPad and have a pedal to control that. That way you can have the feel, but all the effects are processed by computer.
Woodie: Then you only have to bring your tablet.
Saulo: That's whart digital mood effects do too, I think. They try to look vintage but it's all digital shit inside.

You were talking about metal bands. How many tracks do they use?
Saulo: They can easily go over 40 - 50 tracks. Sometimes they can do 10 layers of just rhythm guitar. They call it walls of guitar. And every track gets a different equalization.
But I also believe that metal people are today the most prone people and the most open minded people to use everything digital. They are.
